{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff7\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times{\*\falt Times New Roman};}
{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva{\*\falt Arial};}{\f73\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f74\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f76\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f77\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f78\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qc\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\qc\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar
\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\s17\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7\fs20 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footnote text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{
\s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text 2;}{\*\cs20 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}}{\info{\author THE COHEN FAMILY}{\operator THE COHEN FAMILY}
{\creatim\yr1998\mo9\dy13\min35}{\revtim\yr1998\mo9\dy16\hr22\min23}{\printim\yr1998\mo9\dy10\hr15\min14}{\version4}{\edmins9}{\nofpages33}{\nofwords8369}{\nofchars-32766}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws0}{\vern89}}\margr1080\margt360\margb850 
\deftab31680\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\viewkind1\viewscale69\viewzk2 \fet0\sectd \sbknone\linex0\headery0\footery0\sectdefaultcl {\header \pard\plain \s15\qc\ri360\nowidctlpar\adjustright \f7 {\fs20 
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qr\sl280\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright {
\par }{\i\f4 ANNA (TIGER) SULTANIK [1-1}{\i\f0 -}{\field{\*\fldinst {\cs20\i\f0  PAGE }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\i\f0\lang1024 1}}}{\i\f4 ]}{
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ri360\sl300\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright \f7 {\i\f0\fs20 From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive}{\i\fs20 
\par }\pard \s16\qc\ri360\sl300\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright {
\par 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \li360\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx4320\tx5040\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\i\f4 \tab }{\f4 Key:\tab 
AS = Anna (Tiger) Sultanik [interviewee]
\par }\pard \li360\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx5040\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {\f4 \tab MS = Marian Salkin [interviewer] 
\par \tab Interview Date: October 31, 1982
\par }\pard \li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {\f4 
\par }{\i\f4 Tape one, side one:}{\f4 
\par }\pard \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {\f4 
\par [Technical problems resulted in some unclear passages.]
\par MS:\tab ...Of Lansdale, Pennsylvania, who will be relating her experiences as a child and a young adult in Poland and in the various concentration ca
mps.  Dult. [sic] [tape off then on]  Ann, would you please tell me where you were born, and when, and a little about your family?
\par AS:\tab I was born May 20th, 1929 in Krakow.  Krakow, which was in Galicia.
\par MS:\tab Southern Poland.
\par AS:\tab Southern Poland, yes.
\par MS:\tab All right.  And tell me a little about your family.
\par AS:\tab O.K.  My father was a physician.  He was married to, year, I think, 1927, to my mother.  And we had, I had a small brother by the name of Theodor.  And he was five years younger than I was.  Which then 
he was about four-and-a-half years old.  And...
\par MS:\tab Well, Ann, what was your mother's maiden name?
\par AS:\tab My mother's maiden name was Meth.  M-E-T-H.  Sara Meth.
\par MS:\tab And do you know whether she had a profession when she married your father?
\par AS:\tab No, she was 19 years old when she married my father, and very shortly after, I was born.  And...
\par MS:\tab Do you, did you have grandparents in your home?  Or...
\par AS:\tab Yeah, not in our home.  In our town we had grandparents.  And my mother came from a family of five.  She has four brothers, and she was the only daughter.  And they lived in the same town.
\par MS:\tab Your father was also from Krakow?
\par AS:\tab No, my father was from Sanok.
\par MS:\tab Which is where in relationship to your community?
\par AS:\tab Well, this is, I think, oh my, I have written down, and I never...
\par MS:\tab Well, within the same?
\par AS:\tab It is, no, it's entirely different.
\par MS:\tab Is it northern Poland?
\par AS:\tab It's in northern Poland, yeah.
\par MS:\tab I see.  I see.  And as a child, did you, did the families, your relatives come together frequently...
\par AS:\tab Yes.  We were constantly, especially my mother's side of the family.  They lived in Krakow.  And we were constantly together.
\par MS:\tab So then you were raised with your brother and cousins...
\par AS:\tab With your brother and my family.  And, you see, my father's mother passed away before the war.  And I didn't have a chance to know her very well, because I was young then.
\par MS:\tab But you did know your maternal grandparents well.
\par AS:\tab Yes.  Yes.
\par MS:\tab What was your life like before the war, or before your life was changed by the Nazi victories in Europe?
\par AS:\tab Before the war it was happy.  Fulfilled life, like every other young child has.  During the war everything changed completely.  In a matter of two weeks we were deprived as Jewish children attend school.  In, my parents
, which, my father then, no, this I need to erase, because I, what it was, eh, I didn't state my father escaped.
\par MS:\tab All right.  Before we get into that, Ann...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Let me just ask you.  When war was first declared...
\par AS:\tab Right.
\par MS:\tab And Germany invaded...
\par AS:\tab Poland.
\par MS:\tab Poland, which was on September 1st...
\par AS:\tab Correct.
\par MS:\tab 1939.
\par AS:\tab Right.
\par MS:\tab Did you feel that immediately, I mean, was it, were you conscious of the war almost from the very first?
\par AS:\tab Yes I was, because my father was, being a doct
or, he was in charge preparing everybody in the building in case of there will be gas war.  He prepared us how to wear gas masks, and what to do, and how to prevent, how to stay alive.  Then we, we as children, we realized that something is different, and
 we are preparing and storing food, and putting them in special containers that, things like that, yes.  We were aware that something was wrong.  But it didn't take too long.  It took only two days, and Germany invaded Poland.
\par MS:\tab Were they in Krakow within two days' time?
\par AS:\tab Within two days, they marched it into Krakow.  [tape off then on]
\par MS:\tab Within two days you said they had moved into Poland.  All right.
\par AS:\tab Correct, yes.
\par MS:\tab What happened as soon as the Germans came into your town?  Were you ordered to stay in your homes, or were you ordered to leave your homes?  Do you remember, Ann?
\par AS:\tab If I can recall, for about four weeks we stayed in our house.  And then they started to form a ghetto, which luckily, where we used to live, this was part of the ghetto.  Because we used to live, the house where I used to live...
\par MS:\tab Your...
\par AS:\tab They declared part of the ghetto.
\par MS:\tab Your original home that you were in...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab At the time.
\par AS:\tab Right.
\par MS:\tab I see.
\par AS:\tab And, but the changes were that we lived in six-bedroom apartment.  We, in six-bedroom apartment, we had six families which moved in with us.  Each one was entitled to have one room.  Six families moved into our apartment.
\par MS:\tab Were these families that...
\par AS:\tab Jewish families.
\par MS:\tab That you knew?  Or were they complete strangers.
\par AS:\tab No, complete strangers.  Except my grandparents.  We took to our place.
\par MS:\tab Well, and, this, you were ordered to do this by what, a German authority of some sort, or...
\par AS:\tab It must have been.  Must have been.  I don't know.  I don't remember.  I sud\-den\-ly found that there were six families, each one placed in one bedroom.
\par MS:\tab And, of course, they used, everyone used the same kitchen facilities?
\par AS:\tab Oh sure.
\par MS:\tab Same bathroom facilities.
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And at this time you were how old, did you say?
\par AS:\tab In 1939 I was nine.  But this was close to 1940.  Then I was close to ten years old.
\par MS:\tab Almost ten years old.  Did your family experience antisemitism before the Hitler period, and, do you have any recollection of any particular antisemitic feelings in your community?
\par AS:\tab The only thing I remember, the reason, this was the reason why I went to He\-brew school, primary to escape.  I was more sheltered, becaus
e I knew that children in the public school, many of them suffered a lot being Jewish.  That's all I know.  And that's what I heard from my parents.
\par MS:\tab Were...
\par AS:\tab I personally didn't experience before, too much, eh.  Later on I did.
\par MS:\tab And you don't remember your parents speaking about any antisemitic moods, eh...
\par AS:\tab No.
\par MS:\tab In the area?
\par AS:\tab No.  The only thing I remember, and this is going back.  I was just about six, seven years old.  It must have been in 1933, because I was born in 1920.  I me
an 1929, about five years old, when people were escaping from Germany.  And they, we opened doors, and they moved with us.  Quite a few families moved to our place...
\par MS:\tab Into your own home?
\par AS:\tab Into our own home.  We took them in.  And they stayed for quite a while.  And then, after this they went to United States.  I know that.
\par MS:\tab That's interesting, Ann.
\par AS:\tab Yes.  We, matter of fact, the person, after the war, helped me to come there.  He's the one who sponsored me to come to United States.
\par MS:\tab One of the families that stayed in your home...
\par AS:\tab Was with, in our home, what we helped them when they were escaping from Germany and then he helped me.
\par MS:\tab Did your family belong to any Jewish organizations or to a synagogue before the Nazi period?
\par AS:\tab Of course, to a synagogue.  This I know.
\par MS:\tab Did any men in your family serve in any national army?  [pause]  You men\-tioned your father.
\par AS:\tab Father.  I am sure I see the uniform, but I can't quote, because I don't know.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.  So he must have served, then.
\par AS:\tab He must have served, \lquote cause I see his picture in uniform, but I don't know.
\par MS:\tab O.K.  About how many Jews lived in your town or city, if you could estimate that, of course.  I don't know.  Was it a highly-organized Jewish community?
\par AS:\tab Oh definitely.  Definitely.  I don't know how many.  My husband would be able to tell you, if he comes in.  I would say that at least 100,000}{\cs18\f4\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s17\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar
\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7\fs20 {\cs18\super \chftn }{ }{\f0 In 1939 there were 60,000 Jews in Krakow, according to the Encyclopaedia Judaica.}}}{\f4  Jews must have lived in Krakow.  But if it'
s wrong, I think Sol will be able to correct you.  Cause Sol, you see, Sol was eight years older, and he remembers this much better than I do.  The pre-war...
\par MS:\tab Period.
\par AS:\tab And he was active in various organizations.
\par MS:\tab Do you remember a }{\i\f4 kehillah}{\f4  organization, or a Jewish, like a Jewish council that might have been active?
\par AS:\tab I know there were organizations, like }{\i\f4 Hashomer Hatzair}{\f4 .  They were saying because of...
\par MS:\tab Well, that was the Zionist group, wasn't it?
\par AS:\tab Zionist group, yes.
\par MS:\tab Yes.
\par AS:\tab Those I remember, but\'85I don't know if I blocked the memories but I don't remember.
\par MS:\tab Ann, what happened to you and your family during the weeks following the German invasion?
\par AS:\tab This was very, very hard.  Because the first few weeks we experienced a lot
.  Number one, because we were well-to-do family, then, we owned this building, and the superintendent from the building was the first one to point to Germans, "Go over there to this apartment.  Here are the rich Jews."  And the first week, when they walk
e
d in into our town, they came to our apartment.  And the first thing they stripped, it is, eh, they took our piano, which, this was for me the hardest part to part, because I played piano.  And, took our Persian carpeting, and crystal chandeliers.  This w
as the first week.  This was right away removed.  And, they removed radios.  We didn't have televisions then.  Radi\-os, and silver.  This was, this happened the first week.
\par MS:\tab Do you remember them coming into the apartment and removing these things?
\par AS:\tab Oh
, very, very clearly.  This I remember very clearly cause, and with it too, they, when they came to pick up the piano, they picked me up too, and they decided that I didn't look Jewish at all, that I should be in their, they called this experiments, what 
t
hey were doing.  And they took me in and took blood test, and I was AB positive blood type.  Because of this AB positive blood type, they claim it's very unknown in European Jews to have this blood type, and it's prominent they called it in Anglo-Saxon re
ligion to be this blood type.  And they put me for all those tests, testing, like a guinea pig, which took about six weeks.  My mother wanted to commit suicide, she was so upset with it.  And she did not know.
\par MS:\tab Well let me, you say that they removed you from your home?
\par AS:\tab From my home.
\par MS:\tab And they kept you elsewhere?
\par AS:\tab They kept me during the day, and during the night I came back home.  I was undergoing all kinds of unknown tests and injections.
\par MS:\tab And this was before you were ghettoized?
\par AS:\tab No, this was in the ghetto.  This was already the first, first week when I moved in into ghetto; this started already.  And it, we were about ten girls which were selected from the ghetto to undergo this experiment.
\par MS:\tab Well now, Ann, I'm not clear.  At first you said the apartment that you were living in initially became a part of the ghetto.
\par AS:\tab Part of the ghetto, yes.
\par MS:\tab Then were you moved to another quarter?
\par AS:\tab No.
\par MS:\tab You...
\par AS:\tab No.  They took in like a section.  I'll give you an example where I live at t
he present time.  They came in, and they said, "Up to here the second house will be the ghetto."  O.K.?  A few weeks later they came and they took the whole street, and they said, "This is going to be the ghetto."  They put fence around it, and that's whe
re they crowded into the, all the Jews which they live in various parts of Krakow\emdash in this small area.  This was the ghetto.  They put wiring.  They made gates.  And that's where we lived for two years.
\par MS:\tab You stayed within this framework.
\par AS:\tab This framework, in two years.  Yes.
\par MS:\tab Were you allowed free access in and out of the ghetto?
\par AS:\tab No.  No.
\par MS:\tab Not at all.
\par AS:\tab Not at all.  Unless you went to the labor camp, which you were too, you were, you can't go by yourself.  You, the Germans came in.  They took you to work.  They brought you back to the gate, and then you went home.
\par MS:\tab And you were not involved in the labor camp then.
\par AS:\tab Later on.
\par MS:\tab But...
\par AS:\tab Not right away.
\par MS:\tab What about your parents?  Were...
\par AS:\tab My moth-, I lost my mother in a ma
tter of nine months after we moved in to ghetto.  They had, the Germans came in, and they started to look for elderly, and children.  For anybody who is not capable to work.  And the first thing they took my grandparents, who lived with us, because my gra
ndparents were not capable of work.  And then they took my brother.  And my brother was not barely six years old.  Then my mother didn't want him to go, that she volunteered to go with him.
\par MS:\tab They, they physically removed them.
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And did you ev
er know where they sent them?  You never knew.  And your mother chose to go with your brother.  [pause]  You were saying, Ann, that your mother left with your brother at that time.  What was her, eh, what was she saying to you at that time?
\par AS:\tab That you go, and, you mu-, you go, and you must work.  You must survive.  And, she pushed me away to the side, and then she left with my brother.
\par MS:\tab And your father was still with you at that time?
\par AS:\tab No.  My father by then was, my father escaped first week.  The first week when war was declared.  Not even the first.  Because the war was declared, and my mother said to my father, \ldblquote 
You go.  Nothing will happen to women with two small children.\rdblquote   Knowing what happened in Germany the first things they were taking intellec\-tu\-als, doctors.  She says, \ldblquote You go.  I stay home.\rdblquote 
  And this was the last what we heard from my father.  I did not know what happened to him.  This was the end.  And I stayed with my mother and my brother at home.
\par MS:\tab All right, then, after your mother left...
\par AS:\tab Right.
\par MS:\tab Then with your brother.  Eh, were there any relatives?
\par AS:\tab No.
\par MS:\tab You, you were at that time, you were on your, on your own literally.
\par AS:\tab Right.  Right.
\par MS:\tab Well what happened to you in the ghetto after, from that time on, Ann?
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab 
From that time, from that time on, I was appointed to work in place, they called this Plaszow.  I don't know if you heard about it.  It was org-, they were organized a Jewish concentration camp.  It used to be a Jewish cemetery.  And they converted a Je
wish cemetery into a labor camp.  And all the Jewish people who were in the ghetto, who were able to work, they put them in this camp, in Plaszow.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab A labor camp.
\par AS:\tab Labor camp.
\par MS:\tab And in what community was it?  Plaszow?
\par AS:\tab Plaszow, yes.  It was Krakow.  It was Jewish cemetery.  It was, you could see the Jewish tombstones.  Out of Jewish tombstones they made walks, things like that.  And that's where...
\par MS:\tab You went to work.
\par AS:\tab I landed.  Yes.  To, I was working over there in a stone quarry.  And one evening I was walking.  Very hungry.  Very cold.  Wearing the wooden shoes.  Winter time.  Pulling the carts with the, how you call it, with stone quarry, you know?
\par MS:\tab The, you were actually digging out, or working...
\par AS:\tab No, pulling them
\par MS:\tab Oh, pulling...
\par AS:\tab Pulling the stones in the wagon, carts...
\par MS:\tab Oh, in carts, yes.
\par AS:\tab Yeah.
\par MS:\tab And you had to do that...
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab At night.  And suddenly somebody looks at me and started to cry.  And I, and he come to me.  He says, "Oh my God."  He says, "I 
can't believe it.  This is Dr. Tiger's daughter.  What are you doing, child, here?"  I said, "I am working."  He said, in the meantime I found out, this man was a tailor, and he used to do the uniforms for the man who was in charge of camp.  His name was 
Goeth, he was, Goeth.  He was sentenced after the war.  And, he says, "I must get you out.  I can't see what's happening to you."  O.K.?  This, this Eichanholtz.  His name was Eichanholtz. [phonetic]
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Excuse me, Ann.  Was this man who addressed you...
\par AS:\tab He was...
\par MS:\tab He was a Pole?
\par AS:\tab A Jew.
\par MS:\tab A Jew.
\par AS:\tab A Jew who was working for, for the Germans, making their uniforms.
\par MS:\tab I see.
\par AS:\tab And he was well-liked by this German, because he was making all the uniforms.  And...
\par MS:\tab So he was a person with some influence.
\par AS:\tab Influence.  And he says, "I will try to get you out as fast as possible."  O.K., in meantime, I was very, very run down.  I couldn't take any more.  I went to, I went to, to work.  And I couldn't.  And I dropped the stones.  And they caugh
t me.  And I was supposed to be sentenced, sentenced to die.  Then, when they were doing, they took me, they was on top of the mountains over there.  They were making fire, and music was playing, and you needed to go, and dig your own grave.  Undress your
self.  [pause]  And, dig the grave, and lay down.  In meantime, I heard the shooting.  There was this, and sud\-den\-ly, everybody is running away.  In meantime was a blackout.
\par MS:\tab Oh, you, you don't know where the shooting was coming from?
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab No, but it was
 a blackout.  The Russians must have been invading this part of Poland and the Germans left everything and run out.  I crawled out, out of the hole, and the last thing I remember, I found myself in a dispensary, and somebody was standing over me and cryin
g.  And, I opened my eyes, and I recognized this person.  This person was, it, but my, like I was just saying, my whole story just is I am very lucky that I am alive.  Because this person looked at me and he says\emdash 
and my Polish name was Hannetchkah [phonetic]\emdash 
It's Annka.  It comes from Ann.  He says, "I don't believe it, my child.  You are here."  And he says, "You must get out from here, because by tomorrow we supposed, everybody in this dispensary supposed to be gone, supposed to die.  Nobody will be left."
  Then he bandaged my legs.  He took me to my barracks, and they, they had opening in the barracks like on top of the ceiling which slides down.  They pushed me there.  They closed this, and this man who did it was a doctor.  He was my father's best frien
d, a Jewish doctor.  And the woman, the nurse, who was helping out in the dispen\-
sary, she was a very good friend of my mother.  And they recognized me.  Then they put me over there, and they say, "See, you stay over there."  And, if they wouldn't have help
ed me, I wouldn't be here today.  Because the same evening, they took anybody who was not able to work, perform; everybody died.  They executed the same evening everybody else.  Then, I was very lucky.  I stayed over there for about 24 hours.  I [unclear]
 
came down, and the rest of the people who survived this terrible thing, they came back, and they nursed me, and I became for a while, better.  In meantime, this, these friends of ours, Dr. Eichanholtz, one day came into my barracks.  He says, "Child, I am
 taking you out from here.  You are going to work for me."  Then he took me out, and I was working in his place\emdash which, I never knew how to sew\emdash 
but he taught me how to sew, and I was doing the buttons for the uniforms and the buttonholes for the uniforms.  And that's where I stayed.  And that's how I stayed till 1943, until they evacuated this camp.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab What was the name, do you know the name of the camp that this all...
\par AS:\tab Yeah, this is Plaszow.  This was P-L-A-S-H-O-[pause]W, it will be in English probably.
\par MS:\tab And this was the original labor camp...
\par AS:\tab Yeah.
\par MS:\tab That made...
\par AS:\tab Put in.
\par MS:\tab That they put you into.
\par AS:\tab Yes.  And from then, from then, what happened, the Russians were approach}{\f4\fs26 \-}{\f4 ing this, this camp, were very close to Krakow.  They needed sudd
enly, Germans needed to wipe out all the evidence of camps.  And what happened, then we needed to dig out, which was so much dirt between the bodies.  Because what they were doing, they were burying people on top of the other, because they were executing 
t
hem every day.  Then we needed to burn all these bodies not to leave any trace when the Russians will come in.  And the smell was just unbelievable.  Because they had small layer of dirt on top of them.  And from then, we started to go on foot through who
le Poland on to Auschwitz.  We didn't have trains, because every, everything was occupied and we were walking.  And...
\par MS:\tab You were being, you were, eh...
\par AS:\tab Transferred.  Transferred by foot.
\par MS:\tab By foot, under German, eh...
\par AS:\tab Yeah.
\par MS:\tab Eh, control.
\par AS:\tab 
Control.  But the funny part, like I was just saying, not long ago, how, we didn't have confidence in Polish people that they will help us at all, because there were two German officers, and who knows how many thousands of us from concentration camp.  I w
as passing my own house, and nobody tried to even fled, and to, because we knew nobody will help us.  Then }{\i\f4 nobody}{\f4 
 even tried to escape.  And we were walking, and walking, and falling, and dying.  And nobody just ran out to anybody to be helped.  Because we knew that they, they wouldn't help us.  And then we ended in Auschwitz.
\par MS:\tab Well, then, you walked then you say from your labor camp to Auschwitz.
\par AS:\tab Auschwitz.
\par MS:\tab Which...
\par AS:\tab On foot, yeah.
\par MS:\tab How long, how long a march was that [unclear]?
\par AS:\tab Oh it was a long, I, I, we lost completely concept of days or nights or... I really truly don't know, until we landed in Auschwitz.  And in Auschwitz I stay only for a week, because they were liquidating Auschwitz too.  I just came the time...

\par MS:\tab You remember the year, Ann, that this was?
\par AS:\tab It must have been 1944, either, yeah, 1944 must have been, yes, because from there I went to Bergen-Belsen.
\par MS:\tab Well then, in other words, from the time that you went into the labor camp which was early in 1940, you stayed in that same labor camp...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab For four years.
\par AS:\tab For, almost four years, yes.
\par MS:\tab I see.  Until '44.
\par AS:\tab '44.
\par MS:\tab According to the map, Krakow and Auschwitz were only about 35 miles apart.
\par AS:\tab Right.  Yeah.
\par MS:\tab And then, can you tell us a little about your experience in Auschwitz?
\par AS:\tab In Auschwitz itself, we stayed only one week, because it happened the same thing.  It was overloaded.  They did not know what to do with all the Jewish people, and they were sending them to different various camps. 
 And in 1944 again the Russian were approaching the area.  And, from then, I don't, I can't remember too much from Ausch\-
witz, and I didn't, the funny part, nobody, at least I did not know about gas chambers.  I know they were there.  I did not realize wha
t was going on, maybe because I was tired.  I did not know.  And one day we woke up, and they told us we were leaving that Auschwitz.  And we're going somewhere else.  And this was the worst part.  They put us in the cattle trains.  I don't know how many,
 how many hundreds of people, and it was winter time.  And we were who knows how many in open trains.  Gave us only one}{\b\f4  }{\f4 eighth}{\b\f4  }{\f4 
of bread.  And we were traveling for few weeks.  And none of the camps wanted to open door for us, because they didn't have enough
 room.  And it was, this was one of the hardest time I ever I think had; it was terrible, because the cold, the hunger, and until finally we arrived in Bergen-Belsen.  And when we arrived in Bergen-Belsen, they opened the door, we were sure that this is t
he end.  Because there were about 50 or 100 Germans with big German shepherds, next to them with guns.  We thought this is it.  This is the end.  They'll probably shoot us, and\'85
 They let us into this camp, a camp which, nobody worked, practically.  They did
n't give you food.  They just left you to decay.  It was, we didn't, we had a litt-, I lived in a barrack with, I don't know how many hundreds were in this place.  We had one barrack, and one, two, three, five people squeeze in to get just a laying positi
on.
\par MS:\tab In one berth.
\par AS:\tab In the, yeah.  And there was no water.  They gave us water only for a very short time a day which everybody was running to get sip of water to drink, to wash yourself.  And that's when the whole epidemic started\emdash lice, and with typh
oid fever, and, and, it was terri-, it was, this was maybe, because the working was hard, but at least you got out.  You were human, you did something.  But here it was just, it was terrible, it was unreal.
\par MS:\tab Ann, the time that you were in Auschwitz, you were not aware that it was a death camp, you're saying?  You weren't conscious...
\par AS:\tab Yes.  I was conscious that you're supposed, you needed to work\emdash if not, they will kill you.  But, we knew that we're going to take showers, and we never knew what's going
 to happen.  But, really, truly, I did not believe that they would do such, I don't think I would be alive probably if I would have thought differently.  But I could not believe that anybody would do such thing.
\par MS:\tab There were no rumors?  You heard nothing...
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab 
Yes, there were a lot of rumors that, yes, that people are killed, and I have seen killing.  Then you know, I, the same way that I was ordering to undress yourself, undress yourself if you didn't do it, but I couldn't believe that they would go and
 do it, to have gas chamber, and kill you by hundreds at the same time.  I could not believe it.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab When you were in the labor camp, and, and then, on your walk to Ausch\-witz...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab During all those years and during that time, did you, was there anybody there that you became friendly with, or someone, because you were alone in the world...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And there were no relatives then of any sort.
\par AS:\tab Nobody.  But I had very good frie
nd, which in, she is my mother's friend, and her, her, her husband was, I think not in throat specialist, in Poland.  And she spotted me in Auschwitz and she helped me a lot too.  She helped me morally, and tried to, to help me.  There was nothing to help
 otherwise, because foodwise...
\par MS:\tab No.  There were just...
\par AS:\tab There was nothing but just morally, psychologically...
\par }\pard \li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {
\par \sect }\sectd \margrsxn1440\linex0\headery0\footery0\sectdefaultcl {\header \pard\plain \s15\qc\ri360\nowidctlpar\adjustright \f7 {\fs20 
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qr\sl280\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright {
\par }{\i\f4 ANNA (TIGER) SULTANIK [1-2}{\i\f0 -}{\field{\*\fldinst {\cs20\i\f0  PAGE }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\i\f0\lang1024 28}}}{\i\f4 ]}{
\par }}\pard\plain \li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\i\f4 Tape one, side two:}{\f4 
\par }\pard \li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f4 
\par }\pard \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright {\f4 MS:\tab You were saying, Ann, that this person, this woman t
hat you met, helped you morally and psychologically.  And, do you know how long she'd been in Auschwitz before she met you there?
\par AS:\tab I don't know.  I don't know.
\par MS:\tab Well, did she, did she leave with you after that short stay with...
\par AS:\tab She leaved with me to Bergen-Belsen.
\par MS:\tab She went with you to Bergen-Belsen.
\par AS:\tab Yes.  Mmm hmm.  And we were in Bergen-Belsen \lquote til 1945 together.
\par MS:\tab That was what, almost a period of...
\par AS:\tab That's where we were liberated, yeah.
\par MS:\tab But you were in Bergen-Belsen for how, do you have any idea how long?  Was it almost a year?
\par AS:\tab Close to it.  I was till April 15th, 1945 I was there.
\par MS:\tab In Bergen-Belsen.  And the American armies?
\par AS:\tab No.
\par MS:\tab No.
\par AS:\tab English.
\par MS:\tab The English armies liberated.
\par AS:\tab Yes.  I wish the American would have liberated us, because I think that be\-
 cause, meaning well, I think English people, not realizing what was happening to us, they fed us, they brought pork, and they brought containers of food, like, I give you stew, and we were ope
ning the cans, and we were eating this cold food.  And half of the people got seriously sick.  A lot of them died because of that.  Not eating for all these years, and suddenly getting hold of this food.  It was disastrous.  Which, on American side was mu
ch, I heard it was much better.
\par MS:\tab Simply because they knew how to take care of these people from a physical point of view?
\par AS:\tab Probably.  Probably.
\par MS:\tab More so than the English.
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab Probably.  They meant well, because they wanted to give us right away eve
rything to eat, but people who didn't eat for so many years, and we were so run down, suddenly opening can of fat, it was, people were consuming whatever they can get hold of.  And that's when they got extremely sick.  A lot of them died because of that t
oo.  [pause; tape off for a long pause then on].
\par MS:\tab Ann, you were saying that the hospital that you, or the camp, rather, that you went to, the Displaced Person Camp, was in an area called Zeilsheim?
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 AS:\tab Correct.
\par MS:\tab And you said this was near Frankfurt.
\par AS:\tab Near Frankfurt-Am-Main.
\par MS:\tab What, what processes did you go through in the Displaced Person Camp?  And how long did you stay there?
\par AS:\tab I stayed from 1945 till 1947, for two years.  We were provided with living quarters, and everybody was supposed to work in one way or the other.  Like some people were working in the kitchen, some in the office.
\par MS:\tab What type of work did you do?
\par AS:\tab And I was working in post office, as a post office clerk.  And, and I think food and everything was provided by the, by HIAS I think.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.  And during this time you were trying to find a place for yourself to resettle?
\par AS:\tab To resettle, exactly.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.  And you never, you never went back to your home in Krakow?
\par AS:\tab No.  I never had the possibility, number one.  Money was involved, which none of us had money.  And, the only way it was to, to seek and look through Red Cross, which I was trying.
\par MS:\tab And you were trying to make contacts...
\par AS:\tab Contacts, yes.
\par MS:\tab With...
\par AS:\tab 
Primary locating my father.  I knew that it's imposs-, it was impossible for my mother to survive.  It was impossible for my brother to survive, because of his age.  I knew that my grandfather passed away in concentration camp, because I was, I have se
en it.  But I...
\par MS:\tab Well what do you mean...
\par AS:\tab I was present when they executed my grandmother and my grandfather and my unc-, my one uncle and his wife.  Then I knew that they can't survive.  Then, the only one which was my hope it was my father.  But 
I, I have written many letters through Red Cross without any luck.
\par MS:\tab Because at that point you did not know where he was.
\par AS:\tab Where he was, and what happened, and, then I almost gave up.  [pause]
\par MS:\tab Well, what was, what was the final outcome of your leaving the Displaced Person Camp?  Where did you go from there?
\par AS:\tab The outcome, it was the 1948.  I don't know exactly why, but they closed the whole Displaced Person Camp.  This was [unclear] everybody needed to leave and then I landed in Frankfurt-Am-Main
, and started going part-time to school, and part-time working.
\par MS:\tab What was the attitude of the German population to the few Jews that came in, back into their community?  Were they helpful to you?
\par AS:\tab No.  Not at all.  Not at all.
\par MS:\tab Well, where did you find a place to live?  And how did...
\par AS:\tab I finally rented in a small room in an apartment house and in this, I stayed over there for about four weeks, and after this, about four different Jewish families decided to take one apartment and share each one a
 room, because nobody could afford an apartment.  And that's how we lived for }{\i\f4 quite}{\f4  a while.  For quite a while.  And then after this I was, I met Sol, and we got married in Germany.
\par MS:\tab Oh, I see.  I see.  Then Sol too had come from a concentration camp?
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And, was trying to relocate as well?
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Then, as a married couple, how did you go about leaving Germany, or find\-ing, you didn't, obviously you had no intention of staying on in Germany.
\par AS:\tab No.  No.  No.  It was very hard.  Number o
ne, we applied, we went to HIAS.  We left our name that we would love to go to United States.  But, it was a long wait.  They said we can find a sponsor who would be willing to sponsor you, it would be able to go much faster.  In meantime, I mentioned to 
you that we used to help people emigrate from...
\par MS:\tab Yes...
\par AS:\tab Germany.
\par MS:\tab People that you helped.
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab All the time when the war ended, they were hunting and looking for any\-body if anybody survived from our family and they located me.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Through the Red Cross?
\par AS:\tab Through the Red Cross, and they are the one who sponsored me and Sol to come to United States.
\par MS:\tab And how long a process did that take?
\par AS:\tab It was a long process.  We came in 1951.  It was a long process, but we were lucky.
\par MS:\tab So you spent almost three years in, in Germany?
\par AS:\tab Yes.  Yeah.
\par MS:\tab And Sol was able to find work there at that time?
\par AS:\tab It was very hard.  It was very hard, but being, well, after we went through every\- thing seemed just great.  We could only function.  This was the main thing.  And that's how we came to United States.
\par MS:\tab Where in, where, what cities did you come to?
\par AS:\tab New York City.
\par MS:\tab And you lived there for...
\par AS:\tab For quite a while, yes.  And we went on our own, and I worked and Sol worked.  We went to night school.  And we found very lovely American family who were extremely nice to us, and felt that they would love}{\b\f4  }{\f4 to}{\b\f4  }{\f4 
sponsor us, not financially, but just to help us to find ourself, to find something, to accomplish something.  And they really did.  They were just very helpful.
\par MS:\tab Ann, tell me, you were never, I'd like to hear about how you finally located your father, but, was Sol also able to find any relatives...
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab Sol found his cousin Kalman Sultanik, and his two brothers, Jacob Sultanik, and Sam Sultanik.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Not, not Sol's brothers, but Sol's cousin's...
\par AS:\tab Cousin's.
\par MS:\tab All, all the three...
\par AS:\tab Yeah.  This is the whole family.  Nobody else survived.  Just four of them.
\par MS:\tab All right, would you tell us a little bit about how you finally [noise!], how you finally located your father?
\par AS:\tab This was years, years after.  I don't know how many years after.  But I know it was 35 years after the war.  I was in New York at somebody's house, and somebody asked me what is my maiden name.  And I told t
hem, and they said, "Wow.  You know what?  I have a doctor in Israel by this name!"  I said, "Do you?  Where does he live?"  And he gave me the address, and I wrote a letter, and it was my father.
\par MS:\tab Did you, eh, did you have any idea that this same person could have been your father?
\par AS:\tab I don't, I still till today, I live, I can't believe it, and I cannot say many times, which is my, my, my sickness, that my family really is perished, that, any time I come across similar name, or anything like this, I be
come just so excited, because I think, it could be!  It, maybe it's possible my brother survived.  Maybe it's possible my father survived.  And that's how I went and wrote my father a letter, and it was my father!  Then I went and took Jeff, and immediate
ly...
\par MS:\tab Jeff was your son.
\par AS:\tab Jeff is my son, yes.  And, who was then nine years old.  And we went to Israel.  When we landed in, on the airport, I stood with Jeff for two-and-a-half hours.  We couldn't locate my father.  Finally somebody approached me. 
 He says, "Are you waiting for somebody?"  I said, "Yes.  And I'm expecting my father and I can't locate him."  Then he asked me my name.  He says, "Do you know he's my family doctor?  And look, he's over there in this corner, over there in the other corn
e
r."  And that's how we met.  And it was very strange meeting.  It was very emotional meeting.  And, a lot of, how shall I say it, my father was remarried.  He married very lovely person.  She never had children of her own.  And, my father never told me th
at my mother's brother is in Israel, because my mother's brother never wanted to forget my father that he never put too much effort to look up if anybody survived from his family.  And they stopped talking to him.
\par MS:\tab Do you, Ann, do you, um, did your father ever relate to you what his experience was?  How he...
\par AS:\tab Surv-...
\par MS:\tab Well, no, after he left the family, and what countries he went to?
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Was he in a concentration camp?  Do you know what...
\par AS:\tab I know all about it, yes.
\par MS:\tab Would you care to tell us what his experience was?
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab 
Sure.  In, when my father fled from home, he landed eventually in Romania.  Romania, part of Romania which the name was Cryova.  Over there, in Cryova, most of the Jewish people who stayed over there, 
they survived.  The king, I don't remember it was King Michael}{\cs18\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s17\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx360\tx1080\tx6840\adjustright \f7\fs20 {\cs18\super \chftn }{ }{\f0 
Possible King Carol II who was forced to abdicate.}}}{ then, or whoever was then in power, was extremely good to Jewish people and immigrants.  He placed them like in a ghetto, but not in a ghet
to what you were restricted or anything.  He gave them food.  He gave them certain amount of money.  And they lived very, very comfortable over there.  And my father landed over there in Cryova, and who else landed over there is my mother's two brothers. 
 They all lived, they were all in Brazil, I mean, in Romania.  And that's how they survived.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab And they were able to live there...
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab To live there all during the war, and then in 1945 it was, my father was, eh, coming from a doctor, he's practicing medi
cine, private medicine, and the Russian occupied then Romania, and then...
\par MS:\tab Ann, do, excuse me, during his internment in the, eh, ghetto, he was able, he continued to practice medicine?
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 AS:\tab Yes.  Yes.  It was entirely different ghetto.  It was not like 
under the German.  They were just concen-, eh, congregating all the immigrants in this certain section, but it was not that they were restricted to get out or things like that.  It was not.  He was practicing medicine.  He was doing work, and they decided
 to go to Israel, the whole family.  And then that's how they landed in Israel.
\par MS:\tab That, that was your uncles and your father.
\par AS:\tab Father, yeah.  And they all settled in Israel.
\par MS:\tab And that was shortly after they were liberated.
\par AS:\tab Mmm hmm.  Yes.
\par MS:\tab After he was liberated.  I see.  And then your father remained in Israel until his death, which was in what year?
\par AS:\tab Yes.  It was 1967.
\par MS:\tab Did you see him again, Ann, or just the one time?
\par AS:\tab I saw he was supposed to go, and I left, I knew he [unclear] he 
told me.  But he told me, as long as he won't touch in particular [unclear] he had, he had problem with his eyes, it was affecting his vision, he says, it won't happen.  That's why he doesn't want to undergo surgery.  In meantime, the minute I left, he we
nt undergone surgery, and from then on he went down the hill.  By the same day, they notified me, the change in time, he was already buried in Israel.
\par MS:\tab So then, in effect, you only saw him...
\par AS:\tab Once.
\par MS:\tab One time.
\par AS:\tab Yeah.  Mmm hmm.
\par MS:\tab Ann, are, is, em, is there anything else that you would like to tell us about your ex-, your war experiences that you felt were very outstanding in your mind?
\par AS:\tab There are so many.  They are so many, and hard work to...
\par MS:\tab Relate to...
\par AS:\tab To relate to, yes.  It's extremely hard to...
\par MS:\tab Talk about it.
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Well, Ann.  I want to thank you very much for...
\par AS:\tab Yeah, but if you have any questions, then, it's easier for me to answer the questions than to relate...
\par MS:\tab All right, well let me just check through a minute.  We can look at that.
\par AS:\tab Or you put on tape...
\par MS:\tab Eh, Ann, when you, eh, going back a little bit in your story, when you were in the labor camp, in Poland, were you aware of any underground resistance groups that were trying to operate within the camp to help the inmates, the Jews?
\par AS:\tab It must have been.  Yes.  I did not know, but I am sure they did.
\par MS:\tab You were saying if anyone would escape from the camp...
\par AS:\tab Right.
\par MS:\tab What was the procedure then...
\par AS:\tab The procedur
e it was after everybody who stayed in camp, this, then they were executing so and so many people.  Like, if one Jewish person would flee, how do you say it, escape, they could take instead 100 and 250 people and execute them for this one person which esc
aped.  And, it was terrible.  Sometimes we were standing outside in the winter for hours, and we were watching, we needed to ex-, we were watching the execu\-
tion.  They made us see the whole execution.  They were hanging people, and the music was playing, a
nd you needed to stand and look at it.  And they were going and coming, one, two, three, four, five.  If you were the fifth one, out you go.  And that's how they were choosing.  It was a pot luck.
\par MS:\tab It, did they...
\par AS:\tab And, you never knew when you come out if you will come back.
\par MS:\tab Well were, there must have been a very tight system of roll call if they knew that one person escaped.
\par AS:\tab They must have.  They have it.  They must have, because otherwise they knew right away if somebody escaped.
\par MS:\tab At any time that you were in the labor camp, did the thought of trying to get out of it ever occur to you?
\par AS:\tab No.  No.  I was, I was so resigned.  Sure, everybody had in mind we would love to escape, but it seemed almost impossible.  It was impossible, and maybe
 because I was so young.  To me it seemed that this is it, and there is no way we will survive, or no way we will be able to escape, and you have seen so many soldiers and so many execu\-
tions each day that, it, I felt it was not [unclear], and what would I do even if I escape?  Where will I go?  Who will hide me?  Who will help me?  And what's the use even to escape where you don't have where to go?
\par MS:\tab Right.
\par AS:\tab O.K.  I was passing by my own house, and I didn't even ask them to go in, because I knew what 
will I do there?  The minute I walk in, the people will come out, the tenants or the superintendent, he says, "Here is a Jewish person.  Take them."  And there was no way to hide.
\par MS:\tab So therefore, the entire time that you were incarcerated, you had no contact with any member of your family...
\par AS:\tab No.
\par MS:\tab Or even friends.
\par AS:\tab The only thing what I knew almost, I was sure that my mother died, because I told you, I was working in a, they called this }{\i\f4 Masschneider, }{\f4 [custom tailor] like in a tailoring thing for 
a while, and I found my mother's coat over there, which was\'85
 We were assorting old clothes, which was brought back now we know from the, from the gas chambers, to be fixed, and then they were all cleaned, and then they were, I don't know what they did with
 them.  Either they sent them to their wife or what, I don't know.  We were repairing them, and I came across my mother coat.  And I know, that I knew right away this is it.  There is no other way she could have survived.  But, [unclear].
\par MS:\tab Do you remember when you first heard that Jews were being murdered in mass numbers, or being gassed, and did you believe these reports?
\par AS:\tab No, I didn\rquote t want to believe it.  I didn't want to believe it.
\par MS:\tab Of course, the realization did come to you certainly.
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab 
There is no question, there, in the end, at the end none of us thought we will even pull through, and we truthfully, I don't think we cared any more.  I really truly mean by the time we were, the last few weeks before liberation, I don't think that there 
w
as one person who could say that they wanted to live.  I don't, I don't think we had the will.  We didn't have the strength.  Most of us were sick.  We, we didn't have, we couldn't work.  We were, we were finished.  And, then even when we were liberated, 
w
e still didn't believe, for weeks we did not believe that we are liberated.  I was carrying a piece of potato, a raw potato, in my pocket four weeks after we were liberated.  I was afraid to part with it, because this was, this, this is the way I could su
rvive\emdash 
a piece of tom-, potato.  And I, then we were hiding.  We were afraid to, to pass.  And I was relating this with my husband, and he says, "Do you know, I had the same thing.  I had diarrhea from the fears."  For four weeks, he kept this, he was afraid
 to part after he was liberated.  The hunger is so great, and believe it or not, there were mothers which, and, which, they had this piece of bread, they didn't even want to share it with their own brothers or sisters.  It became so that, it was, it was s
ad but that's what happened.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab An experience like this was enough to make...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab People so different.
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Were you involved in any selections in the death camps at any time?
\par AS:\tab If I was selected too?
\par MS:\tab Yeah, were you, were, eh, can you relate any selections that may have taken place in Bergen-Belsen, or, but not in Auschwitz, because you stayed there only a short time.
\par AS:\tab No, it was in Plaszow, this was the only way what I experienced the, the, being sentenced to die.  This was my, my experience.
\par MS:\tab And that was your closest...
\par AS:\tab The closest one, because I was already was wounded, and if not, it was like, if not the blackout, I would have been dead.  Because I had to, that's why I couldn't work.  My husband too.  But, this was my cl
osest to being dead.  And there were a few close ones which I didn't realize.  I was in Auschwitz in that, taking the bath, the shower, but before us, the group was all gassed, and we went out from the other hall, and we were out because they couldn
\rquote t gas all at the same time.  And after this following day, we went to Bergen-Belsen.  But if we, it was just a matter of minutes I would have been gassed too.  But we didn't know all those things till later.
\par MS:\tab They were taking you into the...
\par AS:\tab Into showers.
\par MS:\tab Into the showers, yes.
\par AS:\tab But you never know if they will put gas on, or what.
\par MS:\tab Water.
\par AS:\tab Because what they do, one got water, one got gas.  They couldn't operate on the same circuits.  Then we were, the same group what I went in, people got, the
y were on the one side, we were one side.  I got shower.  I got out.  However, my friends, I came out, they were gone.  And that following morning we went to Bergen-Belsen, because they were liquidated.  And it, it was like I was just saying, it was just 
matter of luck.  If they say, "How do you survive?"  It's ridiculous to say it, "I survived this or this way."  It was just plain luck.  Plain luck.
\par MS:\tab Really amazing.  Ann, when we were discussing the fact that you would be willing to talk to us about your Holocaust experience, you said something quite interesting, that up until the time of the filming and showing of the television film, }{
\i\f4 The Holocaust,}{\f4  that you were not able to speak or come to terms about your experience.  Could you tell us about, about it yourself a little bit?
\par AS:\tab Yes, it's true.  Then the evening when they were supposed to show this movie, my son called me from college, and he says, "Mom, I don't want you to watch it.  It will be too hard for you to go back and it, and look at it again.
"  I said, "O.K."  But I did.  I decided, let me, I need, I need to, I know that I have completely, I blocked myself from the past.  I need to, I need to watch it.  I turn on the television, and I started to watch the movie.  My husband was, I decided I w
a
s in one room watching, and my husband in the other room.  I watched this movie and the, for the first time in all these years, I just completely broke down.  I, for two days I, I just was wearing dark glasses, and I just could not go out, and just, I, I 
w
as total mess.  Number one, it, it just brought all my memories.  The name of the girl in this movie was Ann.  My name was Ann.  Her father was a doctor.  My father was a doctor.  My father got a medical degree exactly in the same place as this doctor got
 
in Berlin.  Number two, I was as a child very much involved and introduced to art and, and music, classical music.  They were, they were the children in the movie.  The whole thing, it was just like reliving the whole thing over again.  After this, exactl
y the same way, she was undergoing the testing.  Like, I don't know...
\par MS:\tab Medical testing.
\par AS:\tab Medical testing.  I was in the same program.  I was identical in the same pro\-gram what, as this girl was, except I was younger than she was.  O.K.?  Then, it wa
s just like, I was in this camp too, which we needed to completely be nude, and that's how I was sentenced the first time to die, to undress myself, dig my own grave, and then they were shooting.  When I saw, I have seen all those men marching in nude, an
d
 being sentenced, this broke me up completely.  I could not for two days sleep, because it brought my whole memories back.  And after this I could slowly talk about it.  I don't know why, but I can, now I can relate more to it.  I never talked about it be
fore at all.  Whenever my son asked me about my past, I said, "Jeff, I can't talk about it."  I would give him whole book, but I could never relate one-to-one basis to express my feelings.  But this helped me, }{\i\f4 The Holocaust}{\f4 .
\par MS:\tab Well, it's interesting that you made this comment, Ann, because there had, there had been a feeling that, a great amount of good has come from that particular episode, the filming of }{\i\f4 The Holocaust}{\f4 
.  And, and of course there was always, there had been the reverse...
\par AS:\tab Side, yeah, I had...
\par MS:\tab And, side too.
\par AS:\tab Reverse side too.
\par MS:\tab But, in general it was able to help many people, and obviously in, in some way it was able to help...
\par AS:\tab It helped me.
\par MS:\tab It helped you.
\par AS:\tab I know it helped me.  I wish it would help some oth
er people, because I heard remarks that it was too gruesome, and people didn't want to watch, because it felt that it was too gruesome, too authentic, and they didn't believe that things like this happened.  And, but, in my case, I know that it really, it
 was }{\i\f4 really}{\f4 
 so close to a, to be authentic that I relived being, cattle train, if you have seen it, I was in the same cattle train going to Auschwitz.  Identical, the same thing.  When I saw those trains passing by, that's when I was in it, going into the [
unclear] to take a walk, to take a shower, not knowing about it but I was there too.  It, it is just, the everything, the march, when you were marching in your uniforms with, the blue and white in those wooden shoes, and, it really brought me out.  But no
w I understand myself better.  I understand why it, suddenly now I hate to sew.  Everything now stems from that.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.
\par AS:\tab Sitting in the factory constantly...
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.
\par AS:\tab Producing all those uniforms.  All the things now I am intelligent enough to realize this, but I can talk at least now.  I can realize }{\i\f4 why}{\f4  I am the way I am...
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.
\par AS:\tab Because of the, of, yeah...
\par MS:\tab Of this...
\par AS:\tab Just, eh...
\par MS:\tab Of this movie bringing it out, and clearing...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And clearing your mind and your heart...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab And your conscience.
\par AS:\tab I felt that really, the people who survived the war, after the war they }{\i\f4 all}{\f4  should have been undergoing either psychological treatment or something I think.  This was what it was done wrong.  Because many o
f these people are bearing this so deep, and they carry this fear for so long.  For many years when I was raising Jeffrey, I was jumping, now middle of the night, not knowing, running to his room to see if he's still in the bed.  I was afraid they will ta
ke him away.  And, there is not one night, I was just saying this, that I could sleep with a pleasant dream.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm. [pause]  A horrendous experience, horrendous.  [pause]  Ann, say that again what you just said about, again you can't hate.
\par AS:\tab You can't hate.  I don't believe in hating.  [pause]
\par MS:\tab Are you saying then that in your heart you feel that, em, well, I don't want to-
\par \sect }\sectd \margrsxn1440\linex0\headery0\footery0\sectdefaultcl {\header \pard\plain \s15\qc\ri360\nowidctlpar\adjustright \f7 {\fs20 
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qr\sl280\slmult1\nowidctlpar\adjustright {
\par }{\i\f4 ANNA (TIGER) SULTANIK [2-1}{\i\f0 -}{\field{\*\fldinst {\cs20\i\f0  PAGE }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\i\f0\lang1024 33}}}{\i\f4 ]}{
\par }}\pard\plain \li360\sl320\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\i\f4 Tape two, side one:}{\f4 
\par }\pard \li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {\f4 
\par }\pard \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright {\f4 MS:\tab We'll go bac
k and ask you a little bit about the children that might have been in the camps, in the labor camps, when you first were placed in them in Poland.  And you of course were saying that there were, you, at, yourself were only ten years of age, and how were y
ou able to remain in the camp at that, at that young age?
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab 
Number one, physically I was well-developed.  I was tall for my age.  Plus, my mother, it's terrible to say, but she forged my papers.  She made my papers that I was twelve years of age.  Otherwi
se I wouldn't be able to obtain the Jewish star.  When you received the band Jewish star, it meant you are able and strong enough to work.  She couldn't do it for my brother, because he was only six, and that's, this is the reason why he died\emdash 
and she volunteered to go with him.  He was not the work material yet.  But because I was that, that's why my mother said, you can recall, \ldblquote You go and work.\rdblquote   And that's how I survived, because I got the Jewish star.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab So then, you could have been one of the youngest...
\par AS:\tab 
Yes.  I was, I am actually one of the youngest survivors right now.  Whoever survived in my age group who is right now 53 years of age, it's considered the youngest who went to, and survived the concentration camp.  They are not, not younger than I
 am.  This I can guarantee.  Because if you are not, you were not able to work, or you were physically not developed, you went right away you were sentenced to die.  And that's what it is. It didn\rquote 
t mean not only mentally, physically.  We all at the age of
 10, 9 or 10, a young lady start, I was menstruating.  I, they give us so many medications, I didn't menstruate till I was 19 years of age.  They completely poisoned my whole system.  I don't know what I was injected with.  But, they told me I will never 
be able to bear children.  That's why they call, we call this Jeff our miracle child, because they told me I will never be able to carry, with all these injection what they were injecting, never be able to bear children.
\par MS:\tab You, did you remember any of the people that policed the labor camp?
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Were they Poles, or were they Germans?
\par AS:\tab Germans.
\par MS:\tab All Germans.
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab I think they were all Germans, but in some instance I know there were Poles too.  But mostly, in my camp, where I was, they were also
, they were speaking fluently German.  They were worse than men in our camp, German women.  They were, they were terrible.  They were just cruel, mean [pause]
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Some of the other interviews that I had, strangely enough, once or twice someone will relate 
that actually there was some humanity amongst some of the Nazi or German guards or on their death march, as they were going through the countries, someone, a German just handed him quickly a piece of bread in his hand.  And that seems so amazing to me, bu
t there was never an episode of any kindness that you remember, or anything that was ever...
\par AS:\tab I, I had been, I had been, when I was in the labor camp, I had few instances, being young, I was protected by many other women in other, not protected, what can
 you protect, but they tried to help me.  But, unfortunately, the kindness what you received, many women received in camp.  And not that I am downgrading anybody, because I feel that if it's your life at stake, that you are, you do anything to, how should
 I say it, to sustain your life.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab But we had a lot of Jewish girls, and young womans, which they gave them\-
selves to German to obtain some food, and hoping that they would, they would help them to survive the war or if they would aid them to
 escape.  At the end, it didn't help so.  But they, they led better life, and they were helped in some way by German.  But only in many ways you, how shall I say it...
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Were willing to submit to them?
\par AS:\tab To submit to them, or, they had [unclear] matter
 of time they were [unclear] few of the women which they were with me in the same camp, they were saying, I was young, but somehow I could never, didn't know what was right and wrong.  Still my mother must have told me something wrong, because I would nev
er sell myself for a piece of bread.
\par MS:\tab Mmm hmm.
\par AS:\tab And, but many did, and they led better life.  How long, at the end didn't matter, but they did.
\par MS:\tab Do you remember how they, how they were treated by the other prisoners if this was obvious?
\par AS:\tab They, it was very obvious to all of us.  Yes.
\par MS:\tab And...
\par AS:\tab Who was helped and who was not helped, and, but, I would say that the girls when they received something, they shared with the rest of the mates in the, like food, they rescued some other people.
  They didn't do it out of pleasure, out of, many of them did out of hunger, out of hope to survive, because very easy people say, "Why did you do it?"  But I felt it was, very easy to say and hard to do.  When they put gun next to your head, your life se
ems so precious, that many people would do anything to survive.  And I don't blame them.  Because I have seen very lovely, lovely girls, they went to bed with those Germans, the }{\i\f4 kapos}{\f4 
, whatever they were, just to obtain better food, better living quarters, and they were hoping to escape.
\par MS:\tab That's interesting, Ann.  Ann, any time during your internment in the labor camp, primarily because this is where you spent most of your time, and maybe in Bergen-Belsen...
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Was there any religious feelings or services or anything of any Jewish content that went on that you were aware of?
\par AS:\tab No there was not at all.  Oh no.
\par MS:\tab And what about in the Polish work camp?
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f4 {AS:\tab Not at all.  Not at all.  There was no time even for religious things.  They kept us on t
he job going to work.  You came home.  You barely had to eat.  Sometimes you got an hour of sleep, and then they were calling us outside.  They were counting you, like this, every night at a certain time, you were standing over there for four, five hours 
i
n the cold.  You get back and you could get an hour or two hour of sleep you regarded, you were the happiest one.  It was never, matter of fact, it was somebody [unclear] religious home.  I always will be a Jew, and, but, it's very hard for me to pray.  I
t
's extremely hard.  When I go to synagogue, I go primary out of tradition.  I am going because I wanted to bring up my ch-, my son in Jewish, in Jewish environment.  But, I am completely empty when I pray.  I hope I eventually will change, but it's very h
ard.  Either, people what I know, they survived the war, either they became very religious, or they lost, completely lost their faith in God.
\par }\pard\plain \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\tx5400\tx5840\tx7200\adjustright \f7 {\f4 MS:\tab Now, that's interesting that you s-, because we know ourselves, amongst our own community we have a family that
 had been in a concentration camp, and they have maintained their religion }{\i\f4 very}{\f4 , very strongly.
\par AS:\tab Strongly.
\par MS:\tab Yes.  And you often wonder how those feelings come again, come on so strong.
\par AS:\tab I don't know.
\par MS:\tab And...
\par AS:\tab But most of my friends, they feel the way I do.
\par MS:\tab It's very hollow.
\par AS:\tab Very hollow.  I would lie, if I would say differently...
\par MS:\tab No, there's no reason to l-...
\par AS:\tab I go because of tradition, because I always will be Jewish.  But it's very...
\par MS:\tab Ann, I want to thank you very much f
or your, for your, for this interview, and for your comments about your life.  I know it's been a very difficult experience for you to go through this, but I hope in many ways it will bring you satisfaction to know that actually you have it down on tape, 
and that it will be a lasting thing for your, for your son\emdash and for yourself too, that your experience is recorded.  And I thank you once again for sharing it with us.
\par AS:\tab You're}{\b\f4  }{\f4 welcome.
\par MS:\tab It's very kind of you.
\par AS:\tab What I would like to say is the most important thing, it is that Jewish people should }{\i\f4 never}{\f4  ever forget what happened, because my parents always told me when it happened in Germany, "It could never happen to us."  And it did happen.

\par MS:\tab So we always have to be on guard.
\par AS:\tab Yes.
\par MS:\tab Yes.  Thank you, Ann.  Thank you very much.  [tape off? then on] Having it forced, you're a doll.
\par AS:\tab I am sorry.
\par MS:\tab You're a doll.  Don't be sorry!  My God, if anybody should be sorry, }{\i\f4 we}{\f4  should be sorry!  You know, I, I have thought so many times...
\par AS:\tab [unclear] together [tape off].
\par }\pard \qj\fi540\li360\sl400\slmult1\nowidctlpar\tx1520\adjustright {\f4 
\par }}