{\rtf1\ansi \deff97\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f97\fnil\fcharset77\fprq2 Geneva{\*\falt Arial};}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\sl320\slmult0\tx720\tx1440\tx7200 \f97 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qc\sl320\slmult0\tx720\tx1440\tx7200 \f97 \sbasedon0\snext15 
header;}{\s16\qc\sl320\slmult0\tx720\tx1440\tx7200 \f97 \sbasedon0\snext16 footer;}}{\info{\author Gratz College}{\creatim\yr1997\mo9\dy14\hr9\min56}{\version1}{\edmins2}{\nofpages0}{\nofwords0}{\nofchars0}{\vern49213}}
\paperw11520\margl2160\margr1440\margt360\margb288 \deftab31680\ftnbj\aenddoc\margmirror\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \sbknone\linex0\headery0\footery0 {\header \pard\plain \s15\qc\li360\ri360\sl240\slmult0 \f97 {\fs20 
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qr\li360\sl280\slmult0 
\par {\i\f8 ALEXANDRA GORKO [1-1-\chpgn ]}
\par }{\footer \pard\plain \s16\qc\ri360\sl300\slmult0\tx720\tx1440\tx7200 \f97 {\i\fs20 From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive}
\par \pard \s16\qc\li360\ri360\sl300\slmult0 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ri20\sl320\slmult0\tx3600\tx4140\tx4580\tx4940\tx6200 \f97 {\f8 \tab Key:\tab AG\tab \emdash \tab Alexandra Gorko, interviewee
\par \tab \tab GS\tab \emdash \tab Gerry Schneeberg, interviewer
\par }\pard \li720\sl400\slmult0\tx3600\tx4140\tx4580\tx4940\tx6200 {\f8 
\par }\pard \qj\fi720\ri20\sl320\slmult0\tx1260\tx3600\tx4140\tx4580\tx4940\tx6200 {\i\f8 Tape one, side one:}{\f8 
\par 
\par GS:\tab 
It is April the 14th, 1986, and I'm talking with Alexandra Gorko about her experiences during the Holocaust. Alexandra, on a tape you made earlier for the Oral History project at Gratz, I had the impression that your experience was that first in the L
odz ghetto you worked as a nurse in the hospital, and then when you went to Auschwitz you were placed in a hospital there to work with Dr. Mengele. There you refused to inject preg\-
 nant women with some substance that may have been gasoline, for an experiment, and as a result Dr. Mengele ordered that you would be beaten before the entire camp, after which you were left unconscious
 on a pile of cadavers and survived because of friends who rescued you. You were then transferred to Ravensbr\'fc ck, do I pronounce this correctly?
\par AG:\tab Ravensbr\'fc ck ["Rah", not "Ray"].
\par GS:\tab Ravensbr\'fc ck, to M\'fc hlhausen, and to Bergen-Belsen. And from there you were liberated. I have the date April, '44, but I think that's a mistake. It must have been '45.
\par AG:\tab '45.
\par GS:\tab '45, so I made a mistake.
\par AG:\tab 15 of April.
\par GS:\tab 
1945, right. After that you returned to Lodz, now I'm not going to go over that portion of it because I particularly am interested in the experiences before the war ended. Now, I found in reading about other people and their experiences, a woman named
 Vira Laskis from Czechoslovakia who wrote about her involvement with a resistance move\- ment and then she ended up in, in, she had an experience in Ravensbr\'fc
 ck and then in Bergen-Belsen. In Bergen-Belsen she mentions the Star Camp, which I believe was a camp of families. Some families were together?
\par AG:\tab We didn't have families.
\par GS:\tab No. All right. There may have been...
\par AG:\tab Theresienstadt.
\par GS:\tab But there may have, was there more than one camp perhaps at Bergen-Bel\- sen?
\par AG:\tab No.
\par GS:\tab No.
\par AG:\tab There was not.
\par GS:\tab All right. She compared the two, and I wondered if your experience would confirm this. She said at Ravensbr\'fc
 ck there was mostly cooperation among the people who were there as inmates, whereas at Bergen-Belsen, there were constant quarrels. She said the people seemed to be reduced to the lowest level of their humanity.
\par AG:\tab Yes. In Ravensbr\'fc ck we were in transfer, in transfer. Nobody stayed in Ravensbr\'fc ck. They killed them or they transferred them to another place, so they trans\- ferred us.
\par GS:\tab And how long were you there? Do you recall?
\par AG:\tab I was there about three weeks.
\par GS:\tab Where, in Bergen-Belsen?
\par AG:\tab Bergen I was six weeks, I was six weeks.
\par GS:\tab And of course that was at the very end of the war period when things must have been the most difficult...
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab For everyone. Did you have this, would you say the same thing, that people were driven to the lowest level of behavior, fighting over food, she related.
\par AG:\tab You do have to have a very, very strong character. That's true. Or you don't care. Because if you care, you didn't fight for it. Food? There was n
o food. There was a piece of bread which was given to us once a day and a bowl of hot soup made out of pota\- to skins.
\par GS:\tab The people who didn't care, I suspect, were people who had just given up on living.
\par AG:\tab Giving up, giving up on living, giving up on everything, old people very, very strong. I know, I never touched the food. I never touched from there anything, anything. I wasn't sick, but I was very...
\par GS:\tab You weren't in a hospital...
\par AG:\tab No.
\par GS:\tab Because of illness...
\par AG:\tab No.
\par GS:\tab At any time.
\par AG:\tab I do
 remember. I think I know two days I think. I can't remember what it was at the time, a stomach, a kind of diarrhea [unclear] two days and I came back [unclear] but I worked I worked in an ammunitions factory. I had to walk four miles [unclear] in snow. I
 had, I was given a pair of wooden shoes, Dutch wooden shoes, were a size too small for me. I had very small feet, but they gave me children\rquote s shoes [unclear]. And I didn\rquote t catch a cold; I didn't even sneeze.
\par GS:\tab And you didn't have the problem that I read, some people had a frozen, feet or toes?
\par AG:\tab No. No.
\par GS:\tab You were fortunate. All right, now, the main thing I'm really interested in, because I am researching the subject of resistance in different forms. I've read, the state\-
 ment that, from this same woman, that during the period when she was there, was f
rom the summer of 1944, until liberation in April of '45, that she claimed very few would stand up to the enemy with dignity and without cowardice. Now, there were two instances that you have related wher
e you stood up to Dr. Mengele at Auschwitz, and earlier in Lodz when you were in the hospital there and had been ordered to...
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab Throw babies out of a window and refused.
\par AG:\tab 
This was in the beginning. This was the beginning. In Auschwitz was, in the ghetto I didn't know much about what was going on in the ghetto. I was like in enclosure. The hospital was a unit in itself, so I didn't know much about. I only knew if someon
e told me who was out, not a nurse, cause I hear now that there were theate
rs in the ghetto, there were concerts. I don't know nothing about it, because I never went out. I was always, I was working so many hours that after work I wasn't even trying to go out even if I could go out.
\par GS:\tab There was...
\par AG:\tab 
So I don't know what was in the ghetto. So, Auschwitz, in Auschwitz I still had this feeling that I should do something. I shouldn't give in, because for five years I didn't give in. I was fighting. I was saving lives. I was doing what I could, and wh
at I know how to. So, in Auschwitz I lost already my father and my mother, and my brother too. So I didn't really care and I told myself. I will not give in to him. If he will kill me that\rquote 
s O.K. with me too. So it was, it was not active resistance, it was more like a passive resistance, \lquote cause I really didn't care any more.
\par GS:\tab Well, I guess you've answered in part my question that was going to come next, and that was, weren't you afraid that your life would be taken whenever you would refuse...
\par AG:\tab No, I didn't.
\par GS:\tab To carry out an order?
\par AG:\tab In this certain, certain moment, I will think of it, and I didn't care.
\par GS:\tab You were aware that other people who refused an order they were killed, I'm sure?
\par AG:\tab Yes. I was aware. I was aware. But this was, this was not in my character to do a thing like he }{\i\f8 told}{\f8  me to do, not asked. I couldn't say that he asked me. He gave me an order.
\par GS:\tab You were told.
\par AG:\tab I was ordered. And I knew that's not in my, I don't have enough strength to do a thing like that. It\rquote s not in my character.
\par GS:\tab So that doing such a thing would be worse than losing your life.
\par AG:\tab Than losing my life.
\par GS:\tab And you had already had such great loss as you said, of your family. You mentioned your friends, several friends, who were with you at different times, and who actually saved your life.
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab I have a sense, from reading other people's experience, that even if it wasn't a life saving situation as dramatic as yours, that having a close friend, perhaps made the dif\- ference 
between holding on and resisting and enduring and continuing to live, and giv\- ing up. As you said, there were many people who just gave up.
\par AG:\tab 
Well we, we felt, all of us felt that nobody cares about us. We felt that we are the only Jews left in the world. Nobody cares about us. So, if someone was close to you and cared about you, and you had someone to care for, this was already a, somethin
g to bind yourself to. To hold yourself with.
\par GS:\tab It was a reason to go on living, wasn't it?
\par AG:\tab Yes. Yes.
\par GS:\tab In y
our experiences, Alexandra, were there any other people whom you knew personally, who were either involved with any underground resistance movement, or who on their own were acting in any way as you did, as you called it, passive resistance, but to me it 
was a very active thing to say, "No, I refuse to carry out an order." Were there any other experiences of other people that...
\par AG:\tab Of course. My brother.
\par GS:\tab Oh yes, with his involvement with the radio...
\par AG:\tab With the radio.
\par GS:\tab The illegal radio.
\par AG:\tab [Unclear] not only the radio, they printed. They wrote a resum\'e9
 s of the radio, the BBC, and they carry it to the factories. And he did it until the day they sent him away. And this was only because of Rumkowski, because nobody else had any, [unclear] with my brother, nobody else but Rum\- kowski took revenge of him.

\par GS:\tab Well, it was illegal, was it not, to use the, to have a radio transmitter...
\par AG:\tab Of course it was.
\par GS:\tab In, the ghetto?
\par AG:\tab Of course. Someone from, someone knew about it and the [unclear] got paid for it.
\par GS:\tab Uh, there was a lot of terrible betrayal, wasn't there? Was your brother and this group of friends who were involved with this hidden radio part of a group, a youth group? Or they were just a few friends?
\par AG:\tab There were thirteen of them, and they weren't youth, they were all in, in late twenties. They were...
\par GS:\tab Were they part, or were they in touch with any resistance move\- ment that you were aware of?
\par AG:\tab I couldn't tell you. I didn't know.
\par GS:\tab If they were, they didn't tell.
\par AG:\tab I didn't even know that this was going on. While it was going on, I didn't know. Neither did my mother.
\par GS:\tab They couldn't, reveal it.
\par AG:\tab I only knew they were thirteen men and they did it for about a year-and-a-half, from the beginning, where we were enclosed in the ghetto, and...
\par GS:\tab Excuse me, that was 1940?
\par AG:\tab It was 1940, and \lquote 41. And January 31 [?], 1942, which I found out, find out about from the [unclear] when it happened that they sent in. It was the first transport then to Chelmno. He was doing this, because he didn\rquote 
t work. He couldn't get work. He didn't work...
\par GS:\tab He had been a lawyer as I recall...
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab And...
\par AG:\tab [unclear] profession. He practiced industrial law. It was mana\- ger\- ial law, [unclear]...
\par GS:\tab [unclear].
\par AG:\tab Nylons, at a nylon factory in Lodz.
\par GS:\tab And after he and his, this group of thirteen were discovered, besides their being sent away on that transport...
\par AG:\tab They sent the family.
\par GS:\tab There was a terrible reprisal of many others who had nothing to do with it.
\par AG:\tab Nothing to do with this. The names, our name was only one so they only took me and my mother [unclear], but the others had relatives. And even people by the same name were sent away.
\par GS:\tab How did your mother and you escape being sent at that time?
\par AG:\tab I was needed in the hospital.
\par GS:\tab Ah, so that gave you an exemption.
\par AG:\tab I was, first I was head nurse. Then I was supervisor at least later in the hospital. Later they built the two hospitals, before even the ghetto was built the director called me and asked me to go to the ghetto.
\par GS:\tab As they were forming...
\par AG:\tab The ghetto. And I did it.
\par GS:\tab And you were able to protect your mother because of your position?
\par AG:\tab And I protected her. And I [unclear] and they were sent in twice with [unclear]. And then they didn\rquote t have such help [?] because they knew they needed me.
\par GS:\tab That really covers the specific questions I wanted to put to you. I don't know if there's anything else that comes to mind that you want to talk about. Remember that my particular 
interest is in researching resistance in different forms. When I say different forms I include in that such things as the cultural activities that took place, and education, which was forbidden.
\par AG:\tab But there was a school.
\par GS:\tab And the underground press, and all, these...
\par AG:\tab There was, yes.
\par GS:\tab Were all resistance.
\par AG:\tab There was the high school. The young children graduated from high school in the ghetto. There was a theatre. There were concerts. I, Jewish theatre, I don't know nothing about it. I only hear
d after the war about it. And sometimes during the war, but I never took any time. I was too tired and too busy. I had more on my mind than those activities.
\par GS:\tab Some historians feel today that these activities did so much to keep up the morale of people.
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab That they were important, maybe equally important...
\par AG:\tab They were.
\par GS:\tab As the armed resistance acts...
\par AG:\tab Yes.
\par GS:\tab In giving people the strength to continue.
\par AG:\tab But mine...
\par GS:\tab But your, you got your...
\par AG:\tab I got my...
\par GS:\tab From your work, didn't you?
\par AG:\tab 
From my work. I saved lives. If we had an operation and I saved someone, it was satisfaction for me enough. If I did work what someone else couldn't do. The hardest operation, abdominal operation which couldn't be performed before the war, were during
 the war, there in the ghetto, because the people were so thin. They were so undernour\- ished. There was no fat under the skin. It was easier for them to, for the surgeons, to perform an operation than it was before.
\par GS:\tab It\rquote s very interesting.
\par AG:\tab 
Do you believe it? It is interesting especially for us [unclear] miracles performed with two syringes and a few needles and the surgeons had their own instruments which they took every day home. They didn't leave them in the hospital, because we knew th
at every day, every minute, some could be an order to cause the hospital...
\par GS:\tab And then, tragically, when the ghetto was liquidated, none of the doctors or nurses were able to go into, to continue their work in the camps. Were there any Jewish doctors or J
ewish nurses in any of the hospitals in the camps where you were, or were they all Germans?
\par AG:\tab There must have been.
\par GS:\tab In Auschwitz?
\par AG:\tab There must have been, but I don't know. I wasn\rquote t long enough. I was a few, a very few, a few minutes, maybe a half an hour, I don't know. I don't even remember how it was.
\par GS:\tab You mean that first day in Auschwitz when you confronted?
\par AG:\tab It wasn't the first day. It was about like three, four days until that day.
\par GS:\tab When you were selected...
\par AG:\tab When I was,
\par GS:\tab To work in the hospital?
\par AG:\tab I volunteered. They asked for nurses. So I volunteered. I, it didn't occur to me that he\rquote s doing such\emdash . See, we didn't know nothing about what was going on. For five years we didn't know anything.
\par GS:\tab No, because they practiced such deception and lies about everything, and kept the truth hidden.
\par AG:\tab Kept the truth hidden. And even if someone knew and came, there were people who came from different camps and told other people about it, but nobody believed it. Nobody believed it. Such a c
ulture. This was one of the most cultured, nations in Europe! The Germans. That they could be such beasts. Because it wasn't, nothing what they did was human.
\par GS:\tab 
And then we've found accounts of how when people were taken from a western area, say the western part of Poland and sent to Auschwitz, cards or letters would be sent back. They'd be forced to write to family or friends still back in the west, reportin
g that things were good, or at least tolerable. That there was enough food to eat and these were letters or cards written just before these people were taken to the gas chambers.
\par AG:\tab Not to the ghetto. Nobody in the ghetto got one letter.
\par GS:\tab Never received any mail in Lodz.
\par AG:\tab 
Because in the ghetto they took people and, like first time in '42, January in '42, to Chelmno, and they shot them right away. We only knew that something is going on if we saw the clothes coming. What was the clothes coming back? The hospital got som
e clothes too. We had children. We had friends [unclear] in the hospital. We had to have something for the children to wear. And we got them back, and we knew that it's not from Germany. These are }{\i\f8 our}{\f8  clothes.
\par GS:\tab You recognized the clothing?
\par AG:\tab 
And if I told I recognized my brother's coat, it gave us food for thought. Where is that coat coming? Something must be going on. They didn't give them new clothes and send the old ones to the ghetto. Something worse. But we pushed away all the bad th
oughts, because we wanted to hope. And mostly it was kept up, this hope, for instance, my hope was that my husband, who wasn't Jewish, would survive.
\par GS:\tab You had reason to believe that he had a good chance...
\par AG:\tab Yes. That's right.
\par GS:\tab To survive.
\par AG:\tab He had a chance. He was in the war. The war didn't last long}{\b\f8  }{\f8 so maybe he's, he ran away. Maybe he's in a prisoner\rquote 
s camp, officers were in different camps. We didn't know about this. But it's how it was. So this was hope. When after the war, I think I talked about it, an English major came to see me. And 
I was called into the office in Bergen-Belsen. I was sure that this was my husband. He was a captain, so now he's a major, and it wasn't. I think I told you...
\par GS:\tab Yes.
\par AG:\tab That I fainted. The hope was a big part of surviving, was hope.
\par GS:\tab And another part of that picture was having a close friend with whom...
\par AG:\tab Who cared...
\par GS:\tab You endured.
\par AG:\tab About you.
\par GS:\tab Right. And who you felt some responsibility and helped care for. All right, thank you very much Alexandra. I appreciate your talking with me.
\par AG:\tab 
This is not important. Now I rem- [unclear]. They were all young Hungarian girls. There were very boisterous and they were very, we couldn't understand what they were saying, but they were very religious. So maybe religion was one of the factors what kept
 people. I don't know. I wasn't religious. I was never, I wasn't brought up religious. My help was from the home [?].
\par GS:\tab All right, I thank you again.
\par }}